-   [Terms and Definitions](#terms-and-definitions)

### Terms and Definitions

Authentication is the process of confirming a licensee's declared
identity.

Authorization is the process of allowing particular identities access to
particular resources.

ARAP stands for Amateur Radio Access Point. ARAP is the method by which
legacy radio signals can be intelligently packaged and transmitted
through Phase 4 Ground equipment and systems. Legacy radio traffic is
placed into subchannels.

Black List is a list of stations that are positively not authorized to
transmit through the satellite. There are probably at least two levels
of blacklist: stations that have merely failed to authenticate, and
stations which are permanently banned regardless of their authentication
status.

GEO stands for either geosynchronous earth orbit or geostationary earth
orbit. Definition must be made explicit in the documentation in order to
differentiate between the two orbit types.

Ground Control Station is a station that can command the satellite.

HEO stands for high earth orbit.

LEO stands for low earth orbit.

Misuse is communications that are illegal or damaging to the
communications system. This includes but is not limited to Harmful
Interference.

NBFM stands for narrow-band frequency modulation.

Operator Database is a database of authenticated and authorized Phase 4
communications operators. The Operator Database is composed of Operator
Lines.

Operator Line is a line in the Operator Database that uniquely
identifies the source of communications traffic in a Phase 4 system. The
Operator Line consists of Operator Fields.
\[call\_sign:SSID:subchannel:token:timestamp\]

Phase 4 Radio or Phase 4 Ground Terminal is equipment that complies with
the Phase 4 Air Interface.

Satellite is any equipment that serves as the payload for any Phase 4
Ground system. This includes but is not limited to an orbiting satellite
payload, satellite simulator (Groundsat), or terrestrial hub.

Stat-Muxing is the process of swapping in data opportunistically or
algorithmically. For example, when channel utilization is less than
100%, telemetry or other data is inserted into the multiplexed downlink.

Subchannels are the designations for legacy radio traffic handled by
Phase 4 Ground equipment and radios. Subchannels receive an English
letter designation. They are “sponsored” by an authenticated and
authorized Phase 4 Radio. The subchannel appears in the operator
database as part of the operator field.

TTJ stands for Take This Job. These are google forms that outline
specific Phase 4 Engineering and Support tasks and allow sign-ups and
communications.

White List is a list of stations that are positively authorized to
transmit through the satellite.
