The AMSAT payload would consist of a software defined radio,
manufactured by RINCON Research Corporation, and placed into operation
in the amateur satellite service. It would be an FCC licensed,
internationally coordinated digital transponder and bent pipe
transponder.

Frequency Bands: 5660 MHz uplink, \~ 10 MHz wide

10475 MHz downlink \~ 10 MHz wide

Modes of operation:

The payload would implement a digital transponder and a bent pipe
transponder using a channelized uplink (frequency division multiplexed)
and would divide these channels between digital uplinks and bent pipe
uplinks based on demand and as coordinated but will be settable by the
operators to best fit the available channel capacity as USAF WFOV
changes position around the earth. The downlink will consist of a single
carrier digital signal and a single frequency band producing an FDM
linear transponder (bent pipe).

Power: In our initial meetings we were told there was a 100+ W
available. We need maximum possible transmit power so we proposed to
consume every available watt but stay beneath the power cap. We propose
that the operators of USAF WFOV simply turn our transponder off when
there is insufficient power to operate our payload as opposed to our
increase in complexity of making multiple power settings at this time.
THIS CAN BE RECONSIDERED IN COOPERATION WITH MSS.

Mass: In our intial meetings we were told that we had up to 20 Kg of
mass. We propose to build a total payload that is significantly less
than 20 Kg total mass, inclusive of antennas, electrics, and cables.

Size: We do not currently know the mass volume allowed or what the
actual envelope is currently. But we foresee a very small footprint on
the cold plate for thermal control, and small footprint external to the
body of the USAF WFOV bus for our antennas.

Antennas:

The current CONOP utilizes short horns operating in the 10 GHz amateur
satellite service allocation and will have a half power beam width that
will subtend the visible earth. The receive antenna concept is a phased
array consisted to two separate flat panels mounted on the available
space adjacent to the nadir pointing face but consisting of one each
panel, mounted on the +X and â€“X face. The 10 GHz band will need at least
two horns, one for the digital transponder and one for the bent pipe
transponder.

Operation of our payload:

We propose the only control needed by AMSAT is power on/power off. We
plan to command and control the payload IN BAND using the digital uplink
with our payload doing decryption, verification, and identification. We
will downlink telemetry from our payload on the digital downlink. This
can and will include any digital data needed by the primary mission. We
propose NO need for any data from our payload to be transmitted for our
payload to any system already on USAF WFOV. There will be zero contact
between our digital system and our data and the USAF WFOV payloads. We
will provide, in coordination with MSS, analog signals consisting of
telemetry points from our payload that MSS wishes us to incorporate.
